

--- Page 1 ---
Real-Time Gait Adaptation for Quadrupeds using Model Predictive
Control and Reinforcement Learning
Prakrut Kotecha∗1, Ganga Nair B ∗1, Shishir Kolathaya 2
Abstract— Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) has en-
abled adaptable and agile quadruped locomotion; however, poli-
cies often converge to a single gait, leading to suboptimal perfor-
mance. Traditionally, Model Predictive Control (MPC) has been
extensively used to obtain task-specific optimal policies but lacks
the ability to adapt to varying environments. To address these
limitations, we propose an optimization framework for real-time
gait adaptation in a continuous gait space, combining the Model
Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) algorithm with a Dreamer
module to produce adaptive and optimal policies for quadruped
locomotion. At each time step, MPPI jointly optimizes the
actions and gait variables using a learned Dreamer reward
that promotes velocity tracking, energy efficiency, stability, and
smooth transitions, while penalizing abrupt gait changes. A
learned value function is incorporated as terminal reward,
extending the formulation to an infinite-horizon planner. We
evaluate our framework in simulation on the Unitree Go1,
demonstrating an average reduction of up to 36.48% in energy
consumption across varying target speeds, while maintaining
accurate tracking and adaptive, task-appropriate gaits.
Keywords:Planning, Reinforcement Learning,
Quadruped
I. INTRODUCTION
In nature, animals instinctively transition between
gaits—such as walking, trotting, and galloping—based on
environmental context and task demands. This behavior is
often attributed to principles of energy minimization [1],
dynamic stability [2], and robustness to perturbations [3].
Quadrupedal robots have achieved remarkable progress in
replicating the agility and versatility of animals, including
dynamic motions like jumping or parkour [4]. However, most
research efforts for multi-terrain locomotion have resulted
in singular gait policies—typically trotting or walking, or
in diverse but preprogrammed or commanded behaviors.
Therefore, developing strategies for adaptive gait selection
and seamless transitions between gaits represents a natural
and essential next step in advancing quadrupedal locomotion.
Traditionally, Model Predictive Control (MPC) has been
used to generate complex, dynamically consistent mo-
tion [5]–[7]. These approaches typically assume fixed
gait parameters—such as contact sequences or timing off-
sets—defineda priori. This assumption limits flexibility dur-
ing deployment, particularly under changing task demands or
varying terrains. Moreover, MPC requires accurate dynamics
∗ Equal Contribution. Decided by cycle race
1G. Nair, P. Kotecha, are with the Robert Bosch Center for Cyber-
Physical Systems, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru.
2S. Kolathaya is with the Robert Bosch Center for Cyber-Physical
Systems and the Department of Computer Science & Automation, Indian
Institute of Science, Bengaluru.
This project is funded by ARTPARK
Email: stochlab@iisc.ac.in, Website: link
Fig. 1. Conventional approaches (left) rely on discrete gait switching
with predefined libraries. Our framework (right) performs joint optimization
over actions and continuous gait parameters using learned dynamics and a
reward-based planner.
models and can be computationally demanding, making it
less suited for online adaptation in complex environments.
To overcome these modeling and adaptability limitations,
Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a data-driven alter-
native that learns control policies directly from interaction,
without requiring an explicit model of the robot [8]. While
RL enables emergent locomotion behaviors, designing re-
ward functions that yield diverse and stable gaits remains
non-trivial. Simple rewards often produce unstable or repeti-
tive behaviors, whereas complex ones tend to bias the policy
toward specific gaits.
Building on this,Hierarchical RLmethods [9], [10] have
been proposed to handle multi-gait behaviors more explicitly.
These architectures decompose control into a high-level
gait selector and a low-level motion controller, improv-
ing behavioral structure and interpretability. However, such
frameworks often interpolate between similar symmetric
gaits (e.g., walk↔trot) and struggle to generalize beyond
predefined patterns.
These limitations motivate hybrid strategies that integrate
the structure and stability of model-based control with the
adaptability of model-free learning. In particular, combining
RL with MPC has shown improved performance in complex
dynamical systems [11]–[13]. During training, such meth-
ods commonly employ a Dreamer-like architecture [14] to
jointly learn a dynamics model, reward estimator, policy, and
value function for long-horizon control. During inference,
an infinite-horizon trajectory optimization problem is solved
by warm-starting the process using the RL policy, enabling
arXiv:2510.20706v2  [cs.RO]  24 Oct 2025
--- Page 2 ---
faster convergence and greater adaptability. However, these
approaches still inherit a key limitation of RL-based poli-
cies—namely, the lack of gait , as the underlying RL policy
typically converges to a single dominant behavior.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF GAIT SELECTION METHODS.
Capability End-to-End Classical Gait Dreamer Ours
RL MPC Library Based
[8] [5] [15] [11]
Gait Diversity ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
Smooth Transitions ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Online Gait Adaptation ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
Dynamics Awareness ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
Planning ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
As evident from Table I, none of the existing approaches
provide all the desired capabilities within a single, unified
framework. To address these challenges, we propose a con-
trol framework for quadrupeds that enablescontinuous, real-
time gait adaptationby jointly optimizing both actions and
gait parameters. Inspired by recent work [11], our method
integrates Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control
with a Dreamer module trained on diverse gait data, which
supplies learned dynamics, reward, value, and policy priors
to guide the optimization.
Key Contributions
•We introduce a novel control framework that performs
infinite-horizon planning over gait and actionsvia
MPPI guided by a learned dreamer module, enabling
diverse gaits, smooth transitions and adaptive behavior
in real time.
•Our method achieves an average reduction of up to
36.48 %in energy consumption compared to baseline
approaches across varying target speeds, while main-
taining accurate tracking and robust gait switching.
•The framework is modular and can be used with any
RL algorithm supporting gait-conditioned policies.
II. SETUP
In this section, we describe the approach incorporated,
starting with the problem formulation and then detailing
the training and deployment processes. To support planning
under unknown dynamics, we utilize a dreamer module
trained in parallel with the RL policy. This module learns
all the parameters required by the MPPI planner during
deployment. While the RL policy is trained using gait-
specific rewards to induce diverse locomotion behaviors, the
dreamer reward is learned using task and energy-specific
terms, the details of which are explained in section III-A.
Our implementation builds on the Walk These Ways
framework [16], a gait-dependent RL architecture in which
the policy is conditioned on manually specified gait parame-
ters. While we adopt this structure in our work, the proposed
planning framework is modular and readily extensible to
other gait-dependent locomotion architectures.
Fig. 2. Overview of the training pipeline: the dreamer module learns latent
dynamics, reward, and value functions from observation histories, while the
expert actor is trained using supervised signals from dreamer outputs.
A. Preliminaries
Quadruped locomotion is modeled as an infinite-horizon
discounted Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP), defined by the tuple:
M={S,A,O, r,P, γ,F}(1)
whereS ⊂R n represents the state space,O ⊂R p the
observation space, andA ⊂R m the action space. The
system dynamics are governed by the transition function
P:S × A 7→Pr(·), withPrbeing a probability measure,
while the observation functionF:S 7→ Oprovides partial
observability. The reward functionr:S × A 7→Rguides
the learning process, andγ∈(0,1)is the discount factor.
B. Training
To solve this POMDP in a RL context, we employ an
Actor-Critic framework trained using the Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) algorithm [16], [17]. In parallel, the
adaptation moduleE θ (encoder) and the dreamer module are
trained using supervised learning (see fig. 2). The adaptation
module is trained to estimate privileged information from
observation history, which is then used to assist the actor
during deployment [16].
Observation & Action Space:The observations in our
task includes the robot’s joint positions relative to their nomi-
nal values, joint velocities, the timing reference variables and
commanded gait (gcmd), projected gravity, and previous two
actions. The action space consists of joint-angle perturbations
(at) applied to the nominal joint angles (q nominal), where
the commanded joint position (q t) at timetis given by:
qt =a t +q nominal. These commands are processed through
an actuator network [8] to compute the torques required for
execution.
Reward:For training, we adopt the reward structure
from Walk These Ways [16], which combines task rewards
with a range of auxiliary terms to enforce stable, gait-
specific locomotion. These include penalties and incentives
for tracking commanded velocities, maintaining posture, and
achieving desired contact schedules.
--- Page 3 ---
Dreamer: Inspired by prior work in combining RL with
planning [11], we incorporate a dreamer module that learns
all components necessary for deployment-time planning.
This modular framework is trained in parallel with the RL
policy and includes:
•Policy(π θ): A cloned policy trained to imitate the expert
RL policy by minimizing the difference in actions under
identical observations. This is used to warm-start the
MPPI planner. It takes a 30-step observation history
(ohist
t ) as input and outputs action (a cloned).
•Dynamics Model(D θ): Learned from environment
interactions to predict the next observation given the
current observation and action.
•Reward Model(R θ): A learned reward function trained
to capture general performance metrics such as velocity
tracking and energy efficiency. It takes observation and
action as input.
•Value Function(V θ): Estimates the expected cumula-
tive reward underR θ, enabling infinite-horizon approxi-
mation without long rollouts during deployment. Unlike
the RL critic, this is designed specifically for planning
(see Section III-A).
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present the details of our framework that
enables gait optimization. The dreamer module, introduced
in the previous section, is used by the Model Predictive Path
Integral (MPPI) planner to optimize both control actions and
gait parameters. We now describe the reward formulation
used for learning, the structure of our MPPI-based planning
algorithm, and the integrated framework as proposed above.
A. Reward Formulation
During the training of RL policy for different gait com-
mands, the critic may rely on gait-specific rewards (such
as Raibert rewards [18]) to enable effective learning of each
gait’s locomotion strategy. However, to enable gait adaptation
during deployment, we require a more generalized reward
function—one that prioritizes energy efficiency and velocity
tracking, without introducing bias toward any particular gait.
To achieve this, we train a separate dreamer critic alongside
the RL critic.
Table II lists the components of the reward used during
training and deployment. The first four terms are learned
using dreamer and optimized jointly during training. The
final two terms are added only during MPPI deployment to
encourage smooth gait transitions and reduce actor diver-
gence.
The total reward at time step (t) used during MPPI plan-
ning is given below. The weights for each rewards areα1−α6
respectively (can be tuned according to requirements).
Rt =α 1rvel+α2renergy +α3rang+α4rcont+α5rdiv+α6rgait
B. Planning via MPPI
We now shift our focus to the deployment phase (as
shown in fig. 3), where control actions and gait parameters
are optimized in real time. Performing this optimization
TABLE II
REWARD COMPONENTS USED IN TRAINING AND DEPLOYMENT.
Term Description Equation
rvel Velocity tracking −∥v robot −v target∥2
renergy Energy efficiency −P
t ∥τt · ˙qt∥
rang Angular velocity −∥ω robot∥2
rcont Action continuity −∥a t −a t−1∥2
rdiv Actor divergence −∥a t −a cloned∥2
rgait Gait continuity (Deployment only) −



gcmd
(t) −g cmd
(t−1)




2
Fig. 3. Pictorial representation of the MPPI algorithm: the warm start
utilises dreamer policy and dynamics to generate initial trajectories to help
MPPI.
online enables the system to use up-to-date observations
and to incorporate deployment-time constraints—such as
physical limitations or task-specific objectives—directly into
the decision-making process.
Our framework involves solving the following optimiza-
tion problem to obtain the optimal action sequencea ∗
t:t+H
and the gait commandsg ∗cmd
t:t+H at the current observationo t:
max
(at,...,at+H)
(gcmd
t ,...,gcmd
t+H)
H−1X
k=0
γkRθ(ˆot+k, at+k) +γHVθ(ˆot+H)
s.t.ˆo t =o t,
ˆot+k+1 =Dθ(ˆot+k, at+k),∀k= 0, . . . , H−1
(2)
In this formulation,o t denotes the current observation,ˆoi
is simulated byD θ, which also incorporates gait commands
gcmd
t ,γis the discount factor, andR θ,V θ, andD θ represent
the reward function, value function, and dynamics model,
respectively. The objective is to maximize the total expected
return, subject to the learned dynamics.
We adopt a MPPI algorithm for deployment due to its
sampling-based nature and its ability to operate without
requiring gradients. This allows us to leverage the learned
dreamer dynamics and reward models even if they are
non-smooth or non-differentiable. MPPI also accommodates
action and gait constraints directly in the sampling procedure.
At each time step(t), a set of trajectories is sampled
from the Dreamer policy and dynamics model, which serves
as a warm start to initialize the mean and variance for
MPPI. Using this warm-started Gaussian distribution, action
--- Page 4 ---
sequences are sampled, and corresponding trajectory rollouts
are generated through the Dreamer dynamics model. The
returns are then computed using the Dreamer reward model
with value bootstrapping. The top-performing trajectories
are selected based on their returns, and a new Gaussian
distribution is fitted to these elites via a momentum-based
update. Here,A S
τ denotes the sampled action trajectory
space,A E
τ represents the elite action trajectory space, andR τ
is the set of returns associated with the action trajectories.
Algorithm 1:MPPI Planner with Gait Optimization
θ: Dreamer model parameters;
(µt−1, σt−1): prior distribution parameters;
ot: current observation;
gcmd
prev : previous gait command
ift== 0then
Setg cmd
prev ←nominal gait (e.g., trot)
Warm start:Initialize(µ t−1, σt−1), andM π from policy
πθ using dynamicsD θ
Set(µ 0, σ0)←(µ t−1, σt−1)
Initialize empty setsA E
τ , AS
τ , Rτ
fori←1toNdo
SampleMtrajectories fromN(µ i−1, σi−1)
foreach sampled trajectory
(gj,cmd
t , . . . , gj,cmd
t+H , aj
t, . . . , aj
t+H)do
Wrap:(g j,cmd
t , . . . , gj,cmd
t+H )←
wrap(gj,cmd
t , . . . , gj,cmd
t+H )
Rj ←0
Setˆoj
t ←simulateo t withg j,cmd
t
fork←0toH−1do
Rj +=γ k ·R θ(ˆoj
t+k, aj
t+k)
ˆoj
t+k+1 ←D θ(ˆoj
t+k, aj
t+k)
// Add gait continuity penalty
Rj −=λ· ∥gj,cmd
t+k −g j,cmd
t+k−1∥2
// Add terminal value prediction
Rj +=γ HVθ(ˆoj
t+H)
Add(g j,cmd
t , . . . , gj,cmd
t+H , aj
t, . . . , aj
t+H),R j to
AS
τ ,R τ
SortA S
τ byR τ and select top-M elite trajectories to
formA E
τ
Fit new distribution(µ elite, σelite)toA E
τ
Update
(µi, σi)←β(µ elite, σelite) + (1−β)(µi−1, σi−1)
Result:First action fromN(µ N , σN )and updatedg cmd
prev
C. Gait Parameter Normalization
The gait parameters are represented as a[3×1]vector,
following the formulation in [16]. Each element is a scalar in
the range[0,1], encoding the phase offset between specific
leg pairs. This compact representation enables continuous
modulation of gait structures and allows the expression of all
two-beat quadrupedal contact patterns. Smooth and bounded
gait variation is enforced using a wrap function.
˜gcmd = (gcmd%1.0)
D. Integrated Architecture
To summarise, the pipeline operates in two stages:
•Offline Training:A dreamer model is trained end-
to-end using a diverse, gait-conditioned RL frame-
work. It learns the policy, dynamics, reward, and value
functions. The modular structure of dreamer enhances
interpretability and flexibility within the framework.
•Online Deployment:During deployment, an MPPI
controller leverages the learned dreamer model to
jointly optimize for both actions and gait parameters.
The proposed architecture enables generalization across
environments and supports adaptive, energy-efficient loco-
motion with gait transitions that emerge from optimization
rather than manual scripting.
IV. EXPERIMENTS ANDRESULTS
We evaluate our framework through a series of experi-
ments in simulation, focusing on algorithm performance, gait
transitions, and energy efficiency. The results highlight the
limitations of fixed-gait policies and demonstrate the benefits
of adaptive gait optimization.
For both training and deployment, we used an open-source
simulation environment for the Unitree Go1 quadruped robot,
built on NVIDIA’s Isaac Gym simulator [19]. The PPO
policy [17] and its corresponding neural network were im-
plemented and trained using PyTorch [20], while the dreamer
module—including the policy, dynamics model, value func-
tion, and reward model, which are Multi-Layer Perceptrons
with hidden dimensions (256, 128) was implemented using
JAX [21].
A. Ablation study
To validate the motivation behind our approach, we per-
form an ablation study that examines the limitations of
using fixed gaits in a flat-terrain setting. Specifically, we
evaluate four major gaits—trot, pace, bound, and pronk—by
measuring velocity tracking error and cost of transport across
a range of commanded velocities. This analysis reveals (as
shown in fig. 4) that no single gait performs well across
all speeds, highlighting the need for a framework that can
optimize gait selection during deployment based on task
demands and performance criteria.
From Fig. 4, we observe that different gaits exhibit dis-
tinct performance profiles as target speed increases. Trotting
maintains consistently low linear velocity errors; however,
as the speed rises from 0.5 m/s to 1.5 m/s, its Cost of
Transport (CoT) remains nearly constant. In contrast, pronk-
ing becomes more energy-efficient at higher speeds while
maintaining competitive tracking accuracy, suggesting better
suitability for fast locomotion. These observations highlight
that no single gait excels across all conditions, underscoring
the need for a planning framework that adaptively selects
gaits based on task demands and performance trade-offs.
B. Gait Adaptation
The simulation results are shown in Fig. 5, where a
continuously increasing forward velocity command is used
to evaluate how the planner adapts its gait in response to
gradually changing task demands. The robot successfully
--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 4. Performance comparison of fixed gaits across command velocities on flat terrain. The results illustrate how linear and angular tracking errors, as
well as cost of transport, vary significantly with gait choice—especially at higher velocities—highlighting the limitations of using a single gait policy and
the need for adaptive gait selection.
Fig. 5. Evaluation of the proposed locomotion planner under a continuously increasing velocity command. The robot effectively tracks the desired forward
velocity with smooth acceleration. Joint trajectories exhibit stable and periodic behavior, indicating coordinated motion. Mean power consumption shows
an initial peak during acceleration followed by steady oscillations. The gait diagram illustrates consistent foot contact patterns and adaptive gait transitions
corresponding to the increasing command speed, with representative snapshots shown below.
TABLE III
TUNABLE HYPERPARAMETERS OFALGORITHM1.
Hyperparameter Value
Horizon (H) 6
MPC iterations (N) 6
Num. samples (M) 500
Num. policy samples (M π) 30
Hyperparameter Value
Num. elite samples (M elite) 60
Discount factor (γ) 0.99
Momentum factor (β) 0.95
Temperature (T) 0.5
tracks the commanded velocity throughout the episode, and
the joint position trajectories remain cyclic and smooth,
indicating stable locomotion even as the gait evolves over
time.
To visualize gait modulation, we directly plot the foot con-
tact patterns for all four legs. These contact schedules reveal
how interlimb coordination adapts with increasing velocity,
capturing continuous gait transitions without needing discrete
gait labels, also highlighting the planner’s ability to generate
context-specific gaits in a continuous manner.
A key observation is that the robot maintains reliable
velocity tracking performance during these transitions, with
no visible degradation in motion stability or quality. The
smooth joint trajectories further confirm that transitions be-
tween gaits are not abrupt or disruptive. Although trotting is
commonly favored in RL-based quadrupedal locomotion, the
planner frequently adapts to alternative coordination patterns
depending on the context—suggesting that tracking accuracy
and energy efficiency are better achieved through continuous
and adaptive gait modulation. These results demonstrate that
the planner effectively selects task-appropriate gaits while
preserving motion continuity and robustness.
C. Energy Consumption
We analyzed energy consumption by comparing our gait
adaptation method with fixed-gait RL baselines using Cost
--- Page 6 ---
TABLE IV
COST OF TRANSPORT COMPARISON
Methods / Velocity 0.5 m/s 1.0 m/s 1.5 m/s 2.0 m/s
RL: Trotting 1.09 0.98 1.07 1.16
RL: Pacing 1.28 1.00 1.11 1.19
RL: Bounding 1.55 1.29 1.29 1.28
RL: Pronking 1.49 1.09 1.04 1.08
Ours 0.918 0.771 0.822 0.914
of Transport (CoT), defined as |P|
m·g·v . Here,|P|denotes the
average power (time-averaged sum of joint torque–velocity
products across all joints),mis the robot mass,gis gravi-
tational acceleration, andvis the average forward velocity.
As shown in Table IV, our method consistently results in
a lower cost of transport across all commanded velocities.
Notably, the energy consumption remains 15-20% lower
constantly when compared to the most efficient gaits in each
velocity range.
This result indicates the inefficiency of using a single gait
across all speeds. For example, trotting is efficient at lower
speeds, whereas pronking performs better at 2.0 m/s. Our
framework avoids such mismatches by dynamically adapt-
ing the gait to suit the environment, resulting in smoother
transitions and significantly reduced energy expenditure.
D. Discussion and Future Work
Some of the practical considerations for hardware de-
ployment and feasibility of the proposed method include
computational overhead and onboard inference frequency.
Although the results presented above were obtained using
a high-specification server, our framework can be deployed
on relatively smaller systems as well. Specifically, we used
an NVIDIA A6000 GPU, which required approximately 5–6
hours to train the RL policy with the Dreamer module. For
inference, we evaluated the controller on an independent sys-
tem equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 3080 GPU, achieving
a control frequency of around 330 Hz. This indicates the
potential for smooth hardware deployment even on moder-
ately powered systems. Onboard GPU computation remains
a requirement for real-world deployment.
The prospect of hardware deployment motivates ex-
tending this framework to multi-terrain locomotion, where
quadrupeds must continuously adapt their gait to uneven
and rough surfaces for robust performance. Future work will
focus on developing terrain-aware extensions of the proposed
method, incorporating visual inputs for predictive planning,
and integrating the Dreamer module with structured models
such as Lagrangian Neural Networks (LNNs) to enhance
generalization and reliability in real-world deployment.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed an optimization framework for
adaptive quadrupedal locomotion that selects gaits based on
task demands such as speed and energy efficiency, rather than
relying on a fixed policy. Unlike standard RL approaches that
often converge to a single gait, our method optimizes gait pa-
rameters online using Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI)
control. Simulation results show that our approach maintains
high velocity tracking accuracy across a wide range of
commanded speeds while reducing energy consumption by
up to 40% at higher speeds compared to fixed-gait baselines.
The results further demonstrate smooth transitions between
gaits without compromising performance, highlighting the
framework’s effectiveness in achieving both adaptability and
efficiency.
REFERENCES
[1] D. F. Hoyt and C. R. Taylor, “Gait and the energetics of locomotion
in horses,”Nature, vol. 292, no. 5820, pp. 239–240, 1981.
[2] M. C. Granatosky, C. M. Bryce, J. Hanna, A. Fitzsimons, M. F. Laird,
K. Stilson, C. E. Wall, and C. F. Ross, “Inter-stride variability triggers
gait transitions in mammals and birds,”Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 285, no. 1893, p. 20181766, 2018.
[3] M. Shafiee, G. Bellegarda, and A. Ijspeert, “Viability leads to the
emergence of gait transitions in learning agile quadrupedal locomotion
on challenging terrains,”Nature Communications, vol. 15, no. 1,
p. 3073, 2024.
[4] D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, D. V . Sako, and M. Hutter, “Anymal parkour:
Learning agile navigation for quadrupedal robots,”Science Robotics,
vol. 9, 2023.
[5] J. D. Carlo, P. M. Wensing, B. Katz, G. Bledt, and S. Kim, “Dynamic
locomotion in the mit cheetah 3 through convex model-predictive con-
trol,”2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pp. 1–9, 2018.
[6] G. Raiola, E. M. Hoffman, M. Focchi, N. G. Tsagarakis, and C. Sem-
ini, “A simple yet effective whole-body locomotion framework for
quadruped robots,”Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, 2020.
[7] D. Kim, J. D. Carlo, B. Katz, G. Bledt, and S. Kim, “Highly dynamic
quadruped locomotion via whole-body impulse control and model
predictive control,”ArXiv, vol. abs/1909.06586, 2019.
[8] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V . Tsounis,
V . Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills
for legged robots,”Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
[9] Y . Yang, T. Zhang, E. Coumans, J. Tan, and B. Boots, “Fast
and efficient locomotion via learned gait transitions,”ArXiv,
vol. abs/2104.04644, 2021.
[10] L. Wei, Y . Li, Y . Ai, Y . Wu, H. Xu, W. Wang, and G. Hu, “Learning
multiple-gait quadrupedal locomotion via hierarchical reinforcement
learning,”International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manu-
facturing, vol. 24, pp. 1599–1613, 2023.
[11] A. Shirwatkar, N. Saxena, K. Chandra, and S. Kolathaya, “Pip-loco:
A proprioceptive infinite horizon planning framework for quadrupedal
robot locomotion,” 2024.
[12] H. Sikchi, W. Zhou, and D. Held, “Learning off-policy with online
planning,” inConference on Robot Learning, pp. 1622–1633, PMLR,
2022.
[13] N. Hansen, H. Su, and X. Wang, “Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world
models for continuous control,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16828,
2023.
[14] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to control:
Learning behaviors by latent imagination,” 2020.
[15] L. Amatucci, J. ha Kim, J. Hwangbo, and H. won Park, “Monte
carlo tree search gait planner for non-gaited legged system control,”
2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 4701–4707, 2022.
[16] G. B. Margolis and P. Agrawal, “Walk these ways: Tuning robot
control for generalization with multiplicity of behavior,” inConference
on Robot Learning, pp. 22–31, PMLR, 2023.
[17] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[18] M. H. Raibert,Legged robots that balance. MIT press, 1986.
[19] V . Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y . Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Mack-
lin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, A. Allshire, A. Handa, and G. State,
“Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot
learning,” 2021.
--- Page 7 ---
[20] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito,
Z. Lin, A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differen-
tiation in pytorch,” 2017.
[21] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary,
D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-
Milne, and Q. Zhang, “JAX: composable transformations of
Python+NumPy programs,” 2018.